.agents/tasks/.done/components-audit.md, before:

---
type: task
title: "Cross-Platform Component Audit"
status: done
created: 2026-01-09
updated: 2025-07-29
---

# Cross-Platform Component Audit

## Current Status

**✅ Phase 1 Complete**: Infrastructure built and 25 components analyzed

- Interactive dashboard available at `/dev/audit`
- Categorization system validated with real data
- Template patterns identified for migration
- **See**: `.agents/tasks/done/mobile-dev-audit-phase1-complete.md` for full Phase 1 results

**🔄 Phase 2 In Progress**: Full component discovery and analysis

## Quick Reference

**Dashboard**: Visit `/dev/audit` for live component status
**Architecture Guide**: `.agents/tasks/todo/mobile-dev/components-shared-arch-masterplan.md`
**Categorization Rules**: See section below for detailed criteria

## Component Categorization Rules

**⚠️ CRITICAL**: Follow these rules exactly to avoid categorization errors.

## Phase 2: Full Component Discovery

### **Current Goal**: Expand audit to remaining ~50+ components in codebase

**Process**:

1. **Scan all components** in `src/components/` and subdirectories
2. **Apply categorization rules** (see below) to classify each component
3. **Analyze primitive usage** and identify raw HTML elements
4. **Detect business logic** patterns for extraction opportunities
5. **Update audit dashboard** with comprehensive data

### **"Shared" Components Criteria (Single component works on both platforms)**

**MUST meet ALL of these requirements:**

✅ **100% Primitive Usage**:

- **NO raw HTML elements** whatsoever (`<div>`, `<span>`, `<button>`, `<input>`, `<a>`, `<img>`, etc.)
- **ALL layout must use Flex primitives**: FlexColumn, FlexRow, FlexCenter, FlexBetween, Container
- **ALL interactive elements** must use primitives: Button, Input, Modal, Select, etc.
- **ALL text must use Text primitive** (not raw text in divs)

✅ **NO Web-Specific Code**:

- **NO Tailwind classes** (React Native doesn't support them)
- **NO raw CSS classes** or inline styles
- **NO web-specific APIs** (DOM manipulation, localStorage without abstraction)
- **NO third-party web libraries** (unless they have React Native equivalents)

✅ **Platform-Agnostic Logic**:

- **Business logic works identically** on both platforms
- **NO platform-specific interaction patterns** (hover states, drag/drop)
- **Data handling is identical** on both platforms

**Examples**: Components that use only primitives with shared business logic

### **"Platform Specific" Components Criteria (Shared logic, different UI)**

**Characteristics**:

- **Shared business logic** can be extracted to hooks
- **Different UI layouts** needed for optimal UX per platform
- **Different interaction patterns**: hover vs touch, drag vs swipe, sidebar vs tabs
- **Platform-specific features**: drag/drop (web), gestures (mobile), navigation patterns

**Implementation Pattern**:

- `Component.web.tsx` - Desktop-optimized UI
- `Component.native.tsx` - Mobile-optimized UI
- `useComponentLogic.ts` - Shared business logic hook

**Examples**:

- Navigation with drag/drop (web) vs touch navigation (mobile)
- Complex modals with sidebar (web) vs tabs (mobile)
- Animations using CSS (web) vs React Native Animated (mobile)

### **"Complex Refactor" Components Criteria (Need breakdown first)**

**Characteristics**:

- **Large components** (typically 200+ lines)
- **Multiple responsibilities** mixed in one component
- **Hard to categorize** as shared vs platform-specific due to complexity
- **Mix UI and business logic** extensively

**Required Action**: Break down into smaller components first, then categorize each piece

**Examples**: Channel.tsx (800+ lines), Message.tsx with many features

### **Primitive Usage Assessment Rules**

**`primitives: "done"`** - Component uses ONLY primitives:

- ✅ Zero raw HTML elements
- ✅ All layout uses Flex primitives
- ✅ All interactions use primitives
- ✅ Ready for primitive categorization

**`primitives: "todo"`** - Component uses ANY raw HTML:

- ❌ ANY `<div>`, `<span>`, `<button>`, `<input>`, `<a>`, `<img>`, etc.
- ❌ ANY Tailwind classes or CSS classes
- ❌ ANY web-specific styling or APIs

**`primitives: "unknown"`** - Needs code inspection to determine

### **Native Readiness Assessment Rules**

**`native: "ready"`** - Component can work on React Native:

- ✅ `primitives: "done"` (100% primitives)
- ✅ No Tailwind classes or web-specific CSS
- ✅ No web-specific APIs or libraries
- ✅ Platform-agnostic business logic

**`native: "todo"`** - Component needs work for React Native:

- ❌ Uses any raw HTML elements
- ❌ Uses Tailwind classes or web CSS
- ❌ Uses web-specific APIs
- ❌ Has platform-specific code that needs extraction

### **Common Categorization Mistakes to Avoid**

❌ **Assuming Flexbox = Ready**: Just because a component uses flexbox layout doesn't mean it's ready - it must use FlexColumn/FlexRow primitives, not `<div className="flex">`

❌ **Partial Primitive Usage = Done**: If a component uses some primitives (Button, Icon) but still has raw `<div>` elements, it's `primitives: "todo"`

❌ **Simple = Shared**: Simple components can still be platform-specific if they use animations, hover states, or web-specific features

❌ **Modal = Automatic**: Modals aren't automatically shared just because Modal primitive exists - the content must also be 100% primitives

### **Logic Extraction Guidelines for Shared Components**

**Extract to Hooks When:**

- Logic is >10 lines
- Has multiple useState/useEffect calls
- Makes API calls or external data fetching
- Has complex business rules or validation
- Could be reused elsewhere in the app

**Keep in Component When:**

- Simple event handlers (`onClick`, `onChange`)
- Pure UI state (show/hide, toggle visibility)
- No external dependencies
- <5 lines of logic
- Simple form validation

**Examples:**

- **Extract**: `useSearchSuggestions` (API calls), `useAccentColor` (localStorage + theme)
- **Keep**: Close button onClick, simple form toggles

### **Quick Categorization Checklist**

For each component, ask:

1. **Any raw HTML?** → If yes: `primitives: "todo"`
2. **Any Tailwind classes?** → If yes: `native: "todo"`
3. **Any web-specific APIs?** → If yes: needs platform-specific handling
4. **Complex/large (200+ lines)?** → Consider "complex_refactor"
5. **Different UX needed per platform?** → "platform_specific"
6. **100% primitives + platform-agnostic?** → "shared"
7. **Complex business logic?** → `logic_needs: "extract"`, else `logic_needs: "keep"`

#### **2.2.2 Special Case: Modal Components**

**Modal-to-Drawer Architecture**: The Modal primitive automatically transforms:

- **Web** (`Modal.web.tsx`): Traditional centered modal with backdrop
- **Native** (`Modal.native.tsx`): Native bottom drawer implementation

**Modal Categorization Rules**:

- **Shared Modals**: Simple content that works well in both modal and drawer formats
  - Forms, confirmations, simple settings
  - Must still meet ALL "shared" criteria (100% primitives, no Tailwind, etc.)
  - Example: KickUserModal - confirmation dialog works identically
- **Platform-Specific Modals**: Complex layouts needing different arrangements
  - Desktop: Side-by-side layouts, wide content, sidebar navigation
  - Mobile: Stacked layouts, full-width, tab navigation
  - Example: UserSettingsModal - desktop sidebar vs mobile tabs

**Also identify component types**:

- **Primitive**: Already our new primitive components (skip these)
- **Simple**: Basic UI components, minimal logic
- **Business**: Components with significant business logic
- **Layout**: Components focused on layout/navigation
- **Complex**: Large components mixing multiple concerns

#### **2.3 Usage Detection**

**Critical for Migration Planning**: Identify unused components that can be deleted instead of migrated.

**Usage Status Values**:

- **`yes`** - Component is actively imported and used in the codebase
- **`no`** - Component exists but is not referenced anywhere (dead code)
- **`unknown`** - Usage status needs to be determined

**Detection Method**:

1. **Search for imports**: `grep -r "import.*ComponentName" src/`
2. **Search for direct usage**: `grep -r "ComponentName" src/ --exclude-dir=node_modules`
3. **Check export patterns**: Look for re-exports in index files
4. **Verify actual usage**: Ensure imports are actually used, not just imported

**Benefits**:

- **Reduce migration scope**: Skip unused components entirely
- **Clean up codebase**: Identify dead code for deletion
- **Prioritize work**: Focus on components that actually matter
- **Accurate estimates**: Get realistic migration effort calculations

## Migration Workflow

### **Phase 3: Component Implementation**

1. **Migrate "shared" components**: Replace raw HTML with primitives
2. **Extract platform-specific logic**: Create shared hooks for business logic
3. **Implement native versions**: Build .native.tsx for platform-specific components
4. **Refactor complex components**: Break down large components first

### **Priority Order**

**High Priority**: Components with no dependencies, frequently used, simple primitive replacements
**Medium Priority**: Moderate complexity, clear logic extraction opportunities
**Low Priority**: Complex refactoring, unclear strategy, edge cases

## Current Progress

**25 Components Analyzed** | **~50+ Remaining**

### **Key Metrics**

- **24% primitive adoption** already achieved (6/25 components)
- **52% shared component potential** (13/25 components)
- **100% usage verification** - all analyzed components are actively used

### **Template Examples Available**

- **Shared**: SearchBar, KickUserModal, AccentColorSwitcher
- **Platform-Specific**: UserSettingsModal, Loading, SpaceButton
- **Complex Refactor**: Channel.tsx, Layout.tsx, AppWithSearch.tsx

### **Next Actions**

1. **Continue component discovery** to remaining codebase
2. **Apply categorization rules** consistently
3. **Prioritize migration work** based on audit data

---

---

_Last updated: 2025-07-29_

Commit message:

refactor: remove Text primitive from production web code
Remove all Text primitive usage from production components and dev
playground, replacing with semantic HTML elements and CSS classes.
This prepares for eventual removal of the Text primitive for web,
keeping it only for React Native consumers.

.agents/tasks/.done/components-audit.md, after:

---
type: task
title: "Cross-Platform Component Audit"
status: done
created: 2026-01-09
updated: 2025-07-29
---

# Cross-Platform Component Audit

## Current Status

**✅ Phase 1 Complete**: Infrastructure built and 25 components analyzed

- Interactive dashboard available at `/dev/audit`
- Categorization system validated with real data
- Template patterns identified for migration
- **See**: `.agents/tasks/done/mobile-dev-audit-phase1-complete.md` for full Phase 1 results

**🔄 Phase 2 In Progress**: Full component discovery and analysis

## Quick Reference

**Dashboard**: Visit `/dev/audit` for live component status
**Architecture Guide**: `.agents/tasks/todo/mobile-dev/components-shared-arch-masterplan.md`
**Categorization Rules**: See section below for detailed criteria

## Component Categorization Rules

**⚠️ CRITICAL**: Follow these rules exactly to avoid categorization errors.

## Phase 2: Full Component Discovery

### **Current Goal**: Expand audit to remaining ~50+ components in codebase

**Process**:

1. **Scan all components** in `src/components/` and subdirectories
2. **Apply categorization rules** (see below) to classify each component
3. **Analyze primitive usage** and identify raw HTML elements
4. **Detect business logic** patterns for extraction opportunities
5. **Update audit dashboard** with comprehensive data

### **"Shared" Components Criteria (Single component works on both platforms)**

**MUST meet ALL of these requirements:**

✅ **100% Primitive Usage**:

- **NO raw HTML elements** whatsoever (`<div>`, `<span>`, `<button>`, `<input>`, `<a>`, `<img>`, etc.)
- **ALL layout must use Flex primitives**: FlexColumn, FlexRow, FlexCenter, FlexBetween, Container
- **ALL interactive elements** must use primitives: Button, Input, Modal, Select, etc.
- **ALL text must use Text primitive on native** (on web, use plain HTML + CSS typography classes)

✅ **NO Web-Specific Code**:

- **NO Tailwind classes** (React Native doesn't support them)
- **NO raw CSS classes** or inline styles
- **NO web-specific APIs** (DOM manipulation, localStorage without abstraction)
- **NO third-party web libraries** (unless they have React Native equivalents)

✅ **Platform-Agnostic Logic**:

- **Business logic works identically** on both platforms
- **NO platform-specific interaction patterns** (hover states, drag/drop)
- **Data handling is identical** on both platforms

**Examples**: Components that use only primitives with shared business logic

### **"Platform Specific" Components Criteria (Shared logic, different UI)**

**Characteristics**:

- **Shared business logic** can be extracted to hooks
- **Different UI layouts** needed for optimal UX per platform
- **Different interaction patterns**: hover vs touch, drag vs swipe, sidebar vs tabs
- **Platform-specific features**: drag/drop (web), gestures (mobile), navigation patterns

**Implementation Pattern**:

- `Component.web.tsx` - Desktop-optimized UI
- `Component.native.tsx` - Mobile-optimized UI
- `useComponentLogic.ts` - Shared business logic hook

**Examples**:

- Navigation with drag/drop (web) vs touch navigation (mobile)
- Complex modals with sidebar (web) vs tabs (mobile)
- Animations using CSS (web) vs React Native Animated (mobile)

### **"Complex Refactor" Components Criteria (Need breakdown first)**

**Characteristics**:

- **Large components** (typically 200+ lines)
- **Multiple responsibilities** mixed in one component
- **Hard to categorize** as shared vs platform-specific due to complexity
- **Mix UI and business logic** extensively

**Required Action**: Break down into smaller components first, then categorize each piece

**Examples**: Channel.tsx (800+ lines), Message.tsx with many features

### **Primitive Usage Assessment Rules**

**`primitives: "done"`** - Component uses ONLY primitives:

- ✅ Zero raw HTML elements
- ✅ All layout uses Flex primitives
- ✅ All interactions use primitives
- ✅ Ready for primitive categorization

**`primitives: "todo"`** - Component uses ANY raw HTML:

- ❌ ANY `<div>`, `<span>`, `<button>`, `<input>`, `<a>`, `<img>`, etc.
- ❌ ANY Tailwind classes or CSS classes
- ❌ ANY web-specific styling or APIs

**`primitives: "unknown"`** - Needs code inspection to determine

### **Native Readiness Assessment Rules**

**`native: "ready"`** - Component can work on React Native:

- ✅ `primitives: "done"` (100% primitives)
- ✅ No Tailwind classes or web-specific CSS
- ✅ No web-specific APIs or libraries
- ✅ Platform-agnostic business logic

**`native: "todo"`** - Component needs work for React Native:

- ❌ Uses any raw HTML elements
- ❌ Uses Tailwind classes or web CSS
- ❌ Uses web-specific APIs
- ❌ Has platform-specific code that needs extraction

### **Common Categorization Mistakes to Avoid**

❌ **Assuming Flexbox = Ready**: Just because a component uses flexbox layout doesn't mean it's ready - it must use FlexColumn/FlexRow primitives, not `<div className="flex">`

❌ **Partial Primitive Usage = Done**: If a component uses some primitives (Button, Icon) but still has raw `<div>` elements, it's `primitives: "todo"`

❌ **Simple = Shared**: Simple components can still be platform-specific if they use animations, hover states, or web-specific features

❌ **Modal = Automatic**: Modals aren't automatically shared just because Modal primitive exists - the content must also be 100% primitives

### **Logic Extraction Guidelines for Shared Components**

**Extract to Hooks When:**

- Logic is >10 lines
- Has multiple useState/useEffect calls
- Makes API calls or external data fetching
- Has complex business rules or validation
- Could be reused elsewhere in the app

**Keep in Component When:**

- Simple event handlers (`onClick`, `onChange`)
- Pure UI state (show/hide, toggle visibility)
- No external dependencies
- <5 lines of logic
- Simple form validation

**Examples:**

- **Extract**: `useSearchSuggestions` (API calls), `useAccentColor` (localStorage + theme)
- **Keep**: Close button onClick, simple form toggles

### **Quick Categorization Checklist**

For each component, ask:

1. **Any raw HTML?** → If yes: `primitives: "todo"`
2. **Any Tailwind classes?** → If yes: `native: "todo"`
3. **Any web-specific APIs?** → If yes: needs platform-specific handling
4. **Complex/large (200+ lines)?** → Consider "complex_refactor"
5. **Different UX needed per platform?** → "platform_specific"
6. **100% primitives + platform-agnostic?** → "shared"
7. **Complex business logic?** → `logic_needs: "extract"`, else `logic_needs: "keep"`

#### **2.2.2 Special Case: Modal Components**

**Modal-to-Drawer Architecture**: The Modal primitive automatically transforms:

- **Web** (`Modal.web.tsx`): Traditional centered modal with backdrop
- **Native** (`Modal.native.tsx`): Native bottom drawer implementation

**Modal Categorization Rules**:

- **Shared Modals**: Simple content that works well in both modal and drawer formats
  - Forms, confirmations, simple settings
  - Must still meet ALL "shared" criteria (100% primitives, no Tailwind, etc.)
  - Example: KickUserModal - confirmation dialog works identically
- **Platform-Specific Modals**: Complex layouts needing different arrangements
  - Desktop: Side-by-side layouts, wide content, sidebar navigation
  - Mobile: Stacked layouts, full-width, tab navigation
  - Example: UserSettingsModal - desktop sidebar vs mobile tabs

**Also identify component types**:

- **Primitive**: Already our new primitive components (skip these)
- **Simple**: Basic UI components, minimal logic
- **Business**: Components with significant business logic
- **Layout**: Components focused on layout/navigation
- **Complex**: Large components mixing multiple concerns

#### **2.3 Usage Detection**

**Critical for Migration Planning**: Identify unused components that can be deleted instead of migrated.

**Usage Status Values**:

- **`yes`** - Component is actively imported and used in the codebase
- **`no`** - Component exists but is not referenced anywhere (dead code)
- **`unknown`** - Usage status needs to be determined

**Detection Method**:

1. **Search for imports**: `grep -r "import.*ComponentName" src/`
2. **Search for direct usage**: `grep -r "ComponentName" src/ --exclude-dir=node_modules`
3. **Check export patterns**: Look for re-exports in index files
4. **Verify actual usage**: Ensure imports are actually used, not just imported

**Benefits**:

- **Reduce migration scope**: Skip unused components entirely
- **Clean up codebase**: Identify dead code for deletion
- **Prioritize work**: Focus on components that actually matter
- **Accurate estimates**: Get realistic migration effort calculations

## Migration Workflow

### **Phase 3: Component Implementation**

1. **Migrate "shared" components**: Replace raw HTML with primitives
2. **Extract platform-specific logic**: Create shared hooks for business logic
3. **Implement native versions**: Build .native.tsx for platform-specific components
4. **Refactor complex components**: Break down large components first

### **Priority Order**

**High Priority**: Components with no dependencies, frequently used, simple primitive replacements
**Medium Priority**: Moderate complexity, clear logic extraction opportunities
**Low Priority**: Complex refactoring, unclear strategy, edge cases

## Current Progress

**25 Components Analyzed** | **~50+ Remaining**

### **Key Metrics**

- **24% primitive adoption** already achieved (6/25 components)
- **52% shared component potential** (13/25 components)
- **100% usage verification** - all analyzed components are actively used

### **Template Examples Available**

- **Shared**: SearchBar, KickUserModal, AccentColorSwitcher
- **Platform-Specific**: UserSettingsModal, Loading, SpaceButton
- **Complex Refactor**: Channel.tsx, Layout.tsx, AppWithSearch.tsx

### **Next Actions**

1. **Continue component discovery** to remaining codebase
2. **Apply categorization rules** consistently
3. **Prioritize migration work** based on audit data

---

---

_Last updated: 2025-07-29_
