.agents/docs/features/security.md, before:

# Security Mechanisms

This document describes the security mechanisms implemented in the application to protect against various attack vectors. Each security mechanism is documented with the files involved for easy reference and maintenance.

---

## 1. XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) Prevention

### Overview

Implemented a **defense-in-depth** approach using three layers:

1. **Input Validation** - Block dangerous HTML characters (`< > " '`) at data entry points
2. **Placeholder Token System** - Safely render mentions without parsing user HTML
3. **React Auto-Escaping** - Built-in JSX attribute escaping as a safety net

### Attack Vectors Mitigated

- HTML injection in messages (e.g., `<script>alert('XSS')</script>`)
- Attribute injection via display names (e.g., `"><script>alert('XSS')</script>`)
- Attribute injection via space names
- Attribute injection via role names
- Phishing links via HTML tags
- UI spoofing via injected elements

### Implementation Details

#### Layer 1: Input Validation

**Core Utilities:**
- `src/utils/validation.ts` - Core validation functions (`validateNameForXSS`, `sanitizeNameForXSS`)

**Validation Hooks:**
- `src/hooks/business/validation/useDisplayNameValidation.ts` - Display name validation logic
- `src/hooks/business/validation/useSpaceNameValidation.ts` - Space name validation logic
- `src/hooks/business/validation/index.ts` - Exports validation hooks

**Applied In:**
- `src/components/onboarding/Onboarding.tsx` - Onboarding display name input
- `src/hooks/business/user/useOnboardingFlowLogic.ts` - Onboarding validation logic
- `src/components/modals/UserSettingsModal/UserSettingsModal.tsx` - User settings display name
- `src/components/modals/CreateSpaceModal.tsx` - Space creation name input
- `src/hooks/business/spaces/useSpaceCreation.ts` - Space creation validation logic
- `src/components/modals/SpaceSettingsModal/SpaceSettingsModal.tsx` - Space settings validation
- `src/components/modals/SpaceSettingsModal/General.tsx` - Space settings name input

#### Layer 2: Placeholder Token System

**Core Implementation:**
- `src/components/message/MessageMarkdownRenderer.tsx` - Converts mentions to safe placeholder tokens and renders them as React components

**How It Works:**
1. User mentions (`@<address>`, `@everyone`) are converted to placeholder tokens (e.g., `<<<MENTION_USER:address>>>`)
2. ReactMarkdown processes the text (escaping all HTML by default)
3. Placeholder tokens are detected and rendered as styled React components
4. No HTML parsing occurs, preventing all HTML injection attacks

**Special Case: YouTube Embeds**

YouTube embeds use a similar safe approach without HTML parsing:

1. Standalone YouTube URLs are converted to markdown image syntax: `![youtube-embed](videoId)`
2. The markdown image component handler detects the special `alt="youtube-embed"` marker
3. Renders a safe React component (`YouTubeFacade`) instead of allowing arbitrary images
4. All other markdown images (user-typed) are blocked to prevent image-based attacks

This approach avoids whitelisting HTML `<div>` or `<iframe>` elements, which could be abused for layout manipulation or UI spoofing.

#### Layer 3: React Auto-Escaping

React automatically escapes all JSX attributes, providing an additional safety layer for any data that might bypass input validation.

### Security Guarantees

- ✅ Users **cannot** inject `<script>` tags in messages
- ✅ Users **cannot** inject `<img>` tags with `onerror` handlers
- ✅ Users **cannot** inject `<iframe>`, `<a>`, `<div>` or other HTML tags
- ✅ Users **cannot** use dangerous characters (`< > " '`) in display/space names
- ✅ Users **cannot** inject arbitrary images via markdown image syntax
- ✅ Markdown formatting still works (**bold**, *italic*, links, code blocks, etc.)
- ✅ User mentions and role mentions render correctly with styling
- ✅ YouTube embeds work securely for standalone URLs without allowing HTML elements

### Testing

Test cases and snippets available in `.agents/tasks/.done/xss-security-test-snippets.txt`

### References

- [OWASP XSS Prevention Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cross_Site_Scripting_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html)
- [ReactMarkdown Security](https://github.com/remarkjs/react-markdown#security)
- Full implementation details: `.agents/tasks/.done/xss-prevention-final-implementation-2025-11-08.md`

---

## 2. Regex DoS (Denial of Service) Prevention

### Overview

Implemented protection against **Regular Expression Denial of Service** attacks, specifically targeting **catastrophic backtracking** vulnerabilities in mention token parsing.

### Attack Vector Mitigated

**Regex Catastrophic Backtracking**: Malicious input containing long strings with unbounded quantifiers (`*`, `+`) in regex patterns with alternation can cause exponential time complexity, freezing the browser.

**Example Attack**:
```javascript
// Malicious mention with 1000+ characters in display name
@[aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa...1000 chars...]<QmValidAddress>
```

This creates a mention token like:
```
<<<MENTION_USER:QmValidAddress:aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa...1000 chars...>>>
```

When processed by a vulnerable regex like `([^>]*)`, the regex engine tries every possible combination, causing exponential processing time.

### Implementation Details

#### Quantifier Limits in Token Processing

**File**: `src/components/message/MessageMarkdownRenderer.tsx`
**Function**: `processMentionTokens()` (lines 358-363)

**Before (Vulnerable)**:
```typescript
const mentionRegex = /<<<MENTION_(USER:.+:([^>]*)|ROLE:([^:]+):([^>]+))>>>/g;
// Unbounded quantifiers: ([^>]*), ([^:]+), ([^>]+)
```

**After (Protected)**:
```typescript
const mentionRegex = new RegExp(`<<<MENTION_(EVERYONE|USER:(${cidPattern}):([^>]{0,200})|ROLE:([^:]{1,50}):([^>]{1,200})|CHANNEL:([^:>]{1,50}):([^:>]{1,200}):([^>]{0,200}))>>>`, 'g');
// Limited quantifiers with maximum bounds
```

**Limits Applied**:
- Display names: `{0,200}` characters maximum
- Role tags: `{1,50}` characters (must have at least 1)
- Role display names: `{1,200}` characters
- Channel IDs: `{1,50}` characters
- Channel names: `{1,200}` characters

#### Input Sanitization for Token Creation

**File**: `src/components/message/MessageMarkdownRenderer.tsx`
**Function**: `sanitizeDisplayName()` (lines 203-213)

```typescript
const sanitizeDisplayName = useCallback((displayName: string | null | undefined): string => {
  if (!displayName) return '';

  return displayName
    .replace(/>>>/g, '') // Remove token-breaking characters
    .substring(0, 200)   // Match regex limit
    .trim();
}, []);
```

**Applied to**:
- User mention display names: `@[DisplayName]<address>` (line 265)
- Channel mention display names: `#[ChannelName]<channelId>` (line 351)

### Why XSS Validation Alone Was Insufficient

The existing XSS validation (`validateNameForXSS`) only blocks HTML-dangerous characters:
```typescript
export const DANGEROUS_HTML_CHARS = /[<>"']/;
```

**XSS Protection**: Prevents content injection
**Regex DoS Protection**: Prevents performance attacks

**Attack bypasses XSS validation because**:
- Long strings without `<>"'` characters pass XSS validation
- Performance attack occurs during token parsing, not content rendering
- Malicious input can come from API, network, or legacy data sources

### Defense Layers

1. **Regex Quantifier Limits**: Maximum character bounds prevent infinite backtracking
2. **Input Sanitization**: Remove token-breaking characters and enforce length limits
3. **Token Format Validation**: Precise IPFS CID patterns reduce regex complexity
4. **Early Bounds Checking**: Fast string validation before expensive regex operations

### Security Guarantees

- ✅ Mention display names **cannot** exceed 200 characters
- ✅ Token-breaking characters (`>>>`) are **automatically removed**
- ✅ Regex processing **bounded to finite time** regardless of input
- ✅ Protection works against **all input sources** (UI, API, network, legacy data)
- ✅ **No functional impact** - legitimate mentions continue working normally
- ✅ **Graceful degradation** - malicious input is sanitized rather than rejected

### Testing Attack Scenarios

**Test Cases**:
1. **Long display names**: 1000+ character names in mention format
2. **Token injection**: Display names containing `>>>` sequences
3. **Mixed attacks**: Combining long strings with special characters
4. **Legacy data**: Pre-existing mentions with unbounded content

**Performance Verification**:
- Maximum parsing time: <5ms for any input
- Browser remains responsive during mention processing
- Memory usage stays within normal bounds

### References

- [OWASP Regular Expression Denial of Service](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Regular_expression_Denial_of_Service_-_ReDoS)
- [Regex Catastrophic Backtracking](https://www.regular-expressions.info/catastrophic.html)
- [Feature Analysis Report](Feature-analyzer identified this vulnerability during centralized validation review)

---

## 3. Rate Limiting for Mention Extraction

### Overview

Implemented **mention count rate limiting** to prevent notification spam and system abuse via excessive mentions.

### Attack Vector Mitigated

**Mention Spam/DoS**: Messages with 100+ mentions flooding users with notifications or overloading mention processing.

### Implementation Details

**File**: `src/utils/mentionUtils.ts` or `src/services/MessageService.ts`
**Function**: `extractMentionsFromText()`

**Limit**: Maximum 20 total mentions per message (user + role + everyone + channel mentions combined)

**Counting Strategy**: Uses syntax-only counting - any mention pattern is counted regardless of whether the user/channel actually exists. This prevents bypass attempts using fake mentions.

**Behavior**: When limit exceeded, message submission is blocked with user-friendly error message in MessageComposer.

### Security Guarantees

- ✅ **Maximum 20 mentions** processed per message
- ✅ **Notification spam prevention** - limits concurrent notifications
- ✅ **Graceful degradation** - excess mentions become plain text without breaking functionality

### References

- Security audit report: `.agents/reports/security-audit-markdown-mentions-2025-11-18.md` (Recommendation 2, line 936)

---

## Future Security Mechanisms

This document will be updated as new security mechanisms are implemented.

### Planned

- End-to-end encryption validation
- Secure key storage mechanisms
- Content Security Policy (CSP) headers

---

**Document Created**: 2025-11-08
**Last Updated**: 2025-11-18 (Added Rate Limiting for Mention Extraction and Regex DoS prevention)

Commit message:

doc: clarify regex vs UI validation limits

.agents/docs/features/security.md, after:

# Security Mechanisms

This document describes the security mechanisms implemented in the application to protect against various attack vectors. Each security mechanism is documented with the files involved for easy reference and maintenance.

---

## 1. XSS (Cross-Site Scripting) Prevention

### Overview

Implemented a **defense-in-depth** approach using three layers:

1. **Input Validation** - Block dangerous HTML characters (`< > " '`) at data entry points
2. **Placeholder Token System** - Safely render mentions without parsing user HTML
3. **React Auto-Escaping** - Built-in JSX attribute escaping as a safety net

### Attack Vectors Mitigated

- HTML injection in messages (e.g., `<script>alert('XSS')</script>`)
- Attribute injection via display names (e.g., `"><script>alert('XSS')</script>`)
- Attribute injection via space names
- Attribute injection via role names
- Phishing links via HTML tags
- UI spoofing via injected elements

### Implementation Details

#### Layer 1: Input Validation

**Core Utilities:**
- `src/utils/validation.ts` - Core validation functions (`validateNameForXSS`, `sanitizeNameForXSS`)

**Validation Hooks:**
- `src/hooks/business/validation/useDisplayNameValidation.ts` - Display name validation logic
- `src/hooks/business/validation/useSpaceNameValidation.ts` - Space name validation logic
- `src/hooks/business/validation/index.ts` - Exports validation hooks

**Applied In:**
- `src/components/onboarding/Onboarding.tsx` - Onboarding display name input
- `src/hooks/business/user/useOnboardingFlowLogic.ts` - Onboarding validation logic
- `src/components/modals/UserSettingsModal/UserSettingsModal.tsx` - User settings display name
- `src/components/modals/CreateSpaceModal.tsx` - Space creation name input
- `src/hooks/business/spaces/useSpaceCreation.ts` - Space creation validation logic
- `src/components/modals/SpaceSettingsModal/SpaceSettingsModal.tsx` - Space settings validation
- `src/components/modals/SpaceSettingsModal/General.tsx` - Space settings name input

#### Layer 2: Placeholder Token System

**Core Implementation:**
- `src/components/message/MessageMarkdownRenderer.tsx` - Converts mentions to safe placeholder tokens and renders them as React components

**How It Works:**
1. User mentions (`@<address>`, `@everyone`) are converted to placeholder tokens (e.g., `<<<MENTION_USER:address>>>`)
2. ReactMarkdown processes the text (escaping all HTML by default)
3. Placeholder tokens are detected and rendered as styled React components
4. No HTML parsing occurs, preventing all HTML injection attacks

**Special Case: YouTube Embeds**

YouTube embeds use a similar safe approach without HTML parsing:

1. Standalone YouTube URLs are converted to markdown image syntax: `![youtube-embed](videoId)`
2. The markdown image component handler detects the special `alt="youtube-embed"` marker
3. Renders a safe React component (`YouTubeFacade`) instead of allowing arbitrary images
4. All other markdown images (user-typed) are blocked to prevent image-based attacks

This approach avoids whitelisting HTML `<div>` or `<iframe>` elements, which could be abused for layout manipulation or UI spoofing.

#### Layer 3: React Auto-Escaping

React automatically escapes all JSX attributes, providing an additional safety layer for any data that might bypass input validation.

### Security Guarantees

- ✅ Users **cannot** inject `<script>` tags in messages
- ✅ Users **cannot** inject `<img>` tags with `onerror` handlers
- ✅ Users **cannot** inject `<iframe>`, `<a>`, `<div>` or other HTML tags
- ✅ Users **cannot** use dangerous characters (`< > [ ] /`) in display/space names
- ✅ Users **cannot** inject arbitrary images via markdown image syntax
- ✅ Markdown formatting still works (**bold**, *italic*, links, code blocks, etc.)
- ✅ User mentions and role mentions render correctly with styling
- ✅ YouTube embeds work securely for standalone URLs without allowing HTML elements

### Testing

Test cases and snippets available in `.agents/tasks/.done/xss-security-test-snippets.txt`

### References

- [OWASP XSS Prevention Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cross_Site_Scripting_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html)
- [ReactMarkdown Security](https://github.com/remarkjs/react-markdown#security)
- Full implementation details: `.agents/tasks/.done/xss-prevention-final-implementation-2025-11-08.md`

---

## 2. Regex DoS (Denial of Service) Prevention

### Overview

Implemented protection against **Regular Expression Denial of Service** attacks, specifically targeting **catastrophic backtracking** vulnerabilities in mention token parsing.

### Attack Vector Mitigated

**Regex Catastrophic Backtracking**: Malicious input containing long strings with unbounded quantifiers (`*`, `+`) in regex patterns with alternation can cause exponential time complexity, freezing the browser.

**Example Attack**:
```javascript
// Malicious mention with 1000+ characters in display name
@[aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa...1000 chars...]<QmValidAddress>
```

This creates a mention token like:
```
<<<MENTION_USER:QmValidAddress:aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa...1000 chars...>>>
```

When processed by a vulnerable regex like `([^>]*)`, the regex engine tries every possible combination, causing exponential processing time.

### Implementation Details

#### Quantifier Limits in Token Processing

**File**: `src/components/message/MessageMarkdownRenderer.tsx`
**Function**: `processMentionTokens()` (lines 358-363)

**Before (Vulnerable)**:
```typescript
const mentionRegex = /<<<MENTION_(USER:.+:([^>]*)|ROLE:([^:]+):([^>]+))>>>/g;
// Unbounded quantifiers: ([^>]*), ([^:]+), ([^>]+)
```

**After (Protected)**:
```typescript
const mentionRegex = new RegExp(`<<<MENTION_(EVERYONE|USER:(${cidPattern}):([^>]{0,200})|ROLE:([^:]{1,50}):([^>]{1,200})|CHANNEL:([^:>]{1,50}):([^:>]{1,200}):([^>]{0,200}))>>>`, 'g');
// Limited quantifiers with maximum bounds
```

**Regex Parsing Limits** (for token processing security, not UI input validation):
- Display names: `{0,200}` characters (accepts empty for graceful handling of malformed data)
- Role tags: `{1,50}` characters
- Role display names: `{1,200}` characters
- Channel IDs: `{1,50}` characters (system-generated, but limited in regex to prevent malformed token attacks)
- Channel names: `{1,200}` characters

> **Note**: These limits are for **regex parsing security** to prevent DoS attacks from any data source (API, network, legacy data). For **UI input validation** limits, see the validation hooks in `src/hooks/business/validation/` which enforce stricter rules (e.g., display names require at least 1 character).

#### Input Sanitization for Token Creation

**File**: `src/components/message/MessageMarkdownRenderer.tsx`
**Function**: `sanitizeDisplayName()` (lines 203-213)

```typescript
const sanitizeDisplayName = useCallback((displayName: string | null | undefined): string => {
  if (!displayName) return '';

  return displayName
    .replace(/>>>/g, '') // Remove token-breaking characters
    .substring(0, 200)   // Match regex limit
    .trim();
}, []);
```

**Applied to**:
- User mention display names: `@[DisplayName]<address>` (line 265)
- Channel mention display names: `#[ChannelName]<channelId>` (line 351)

### Why XSS Validation Alone Was Insufficient

The existing XSS validation (`validateNameForXSS`) only blocks HTML-dangerous characters:
```typescript
export const DANGEROUS_HTML_CHARS = /[<>"']/;
```

**XSS Protection**: Prevents content injection
**Regex DoS Protection**: Prevents performance attacks

**Attack bypasses XSS validation because**:
- Long strings without `<>"'` characters pass XSS validation
- Performance attack occurs during token parsing, not content rendering
- Malicious input can come from API, network, or legacy data sources

### Defense Layers

1. **Regex Quantifier Limits**: Maximum character bounds prevent infinite backtracking
2. **Input Sanitization**: Remove token-breaking characters and enforce length limits
3. **Token Format Validation**: Precise IPFS CID patterns reduce regex complexity
4. **Early Bounds Checking**: Fast string validation before expensive regex operations

### Security Guarantees

- ✅ Mention display names **cannot** exceed 200 characters
- ✅ Token-breaking characters (`>>>`) are **automatically removed**
- ✅ Regex processing **bounded to finite time** regardless of input
- ✅ Protection works against **all input sources** (UI, API, network, legacy data)
- ✅ **No functional impact** - legitimate mentions continue working normally
- ✅ **Graceful degradation** - malicious input is sanitized rather than rejected

### Testing Attack Scenarios

**Test Cases**:
1. **Long display names**: 1000+ character names in mention format
2. **Token injection**: Display names containing `>>>` sequences
3. **Mixed attacks**: Combining long strings with special characters
4. **Legacy data**: Pre-existing mentions with unbounded content

**Performance Verification**:
- Maximum parsing time: <5ms for any input
- Browser remains responsive during mention processing
- Memory usage stays within normal bounds

### References

- [OWASP Regular Expression Denial of Service](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Regular_expression_Denial_of_Service_-_ReDoS)
- [Regex Catastrophic Backtracking](https://www.regular-expressions.info/catastrophic.html)
- [Feature Analysis Report](Feature-analyzer identified this vulnerability during centralized validation review)

---

## 3. Rate Limiting for Mention Extraction

### Overview

Implemented **mention count rate limiting** to prevent notification spam and system abuse via excessive mentions.

### Attack Vector Mitigated

**Mention Spam/DoS**: Messages with 100+ mentions flooding users with notifications or overloading mention processing.

### Implementation Details

**File**: `src/utils/mentionUtils.ts` or `src/services/MessageService.ts`
**Function**: `extractMentionsFromText()`

**Limit**: Maximum 20 total mentions per message (user + role + everyone + channel mentions combined)

**Counting Strategy**: Uses syntax-only counting - any mention pattern is counted regardless of whether the user/channel actually exists. This prevents bypass attempts using fake mentions.

**Behavior**: When limit exceeded, message submission is blocked with user-friendly error message in MessageComposer.

### Security Guarantees

- ✅ **Maximum 20 mentions** processed per message
- ✅ **Notification spam prevention** - limits concurrent notifications
- ✅ **Graceful degradation** - excess mentions become plain text without breaking functionality

### References

- Security audit report: `.agents/reports/security-audit-markdown-mentions-2025-11-18.md` (Recommendation 2, line 936)

---

## Future Security Mechanisms

This document will be updated as new security mechanisms are implemented.

### Planned

- End-to-end encryption validation
- Secure key storage mechanisms
- Content Security Policy (CSP) headers

---

**Document Created**: 2025-11-08
**Last Updated**: 2025-11-24 (Clarified regex parsing limits vs UI input validation)
